%%% Notes on books and films

\documentclass{article}

\usepackage{notes}

\addbibresource{bookfilm.bib}

\title{Notes on books and films}

\hypersetup{pdftitle={Notes on books and films}}

\hypersetup{pdfsubject={Books and films}}

\hypersetup{pdfkeywords={books, films, writing}}

\author{Raghavendra Nyshadham\thanks{\cczero} \\
  {\normalsize\nolinkurl{rn@raghnysh.com}}}

\hypersetup{pdfauthor={Raghavendra Nyshadham (rn@raghnysh.com)}}

\date{2024-07-28}

\begin{document}

\begin{titlingpage}
  \maketitle

  \begin{abstract}
    This document contains my notes on the books that I read, and on
    the films that I watch.  The document is a work in progress.  The
    files of the current version of the document are available at
    \url{https://github.com/raghnysh/bookfilm}.

    \ghtopics{books, films, writing}
  \end{abstract}
\end{titlingpage}

\tableofcontents

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:113nrd0o}

This document consists of my notes on the books that I read, and on
the films that I watch.  The document is a work in progress.  The
files of the current version of the document are available at
\url{https://github.com/raghnysh/bookfilm}.

\section{Mountains may depart}
\label{sec:ov8yna0s}

I first watched this film on 26 July, 2024 on MUBI.  It is directed by
Jia Zhangke.  I have seen his films \emph{Pickpocket}, \emph{A touch
  of sin}, and \emph{24 city}, but don't remember much about them.
\emph{Pickpocket} is the one which I remember the most vividly; in the
final scenes, the petty thief the film is about is tied on a busy road
while the police officer escorting him goes off for a cup of tea or
something; the pickpocket is deeply embarrassed when people stop on
their errands to stare at him; it is a moving scene, and leaves me
with a deep sense of pity for the gentle chained man.

\emph{Mountains may depart} was made in 2015.  The main actors in the
film are Zhao Tao, Yi Zhang, Jingdong Liang, and Dong Zijian.  Tao had
acted in some of Zhangke's earlier films including \emph{A touch of
  sin}.

The central story of \emph{Mountains may depart} invloves a woman Shao
Tao (played by Zhao Tao), the men Jinsheng Zhang and Jangjung Liang
a.k.a Liangzi (played by Yi Zhang and Jingdong Liang), and the boy
Daole Zhang a.k.a Dollar (played by Dong Zijian).  The film is located
in the city of Fenying in the Shanxi province of North China.

\subsection{Youth}
\label{sec:jfdg3q3z}

It is 1999.  Tao is a young woman, a singer and a dancer.  She teaches
in a disco school in the city, and sings regularly at the New Year
concert and other community festivals.  Zhang and Liangzi are her
close friends, both of them in love with her, although she seems
strangely oblivious to their feelings.

The film opens with Tao and her students dancing to the famous Pet
Shop Boys song \emph{Go West}.  She makes waves with her hands as the
dancers move with exercise-like regularity and disappear from the
scene holding each other in single file.

Zhang is an aggressive industrial entrepreneur, and goes around
bragging about the money he makes and his fancy foreign car.  Liangzi
works as a clerk in a coal mine, keeping track of the helmets of the
miners.

Neither of the two men is reticent about expressing his love for Tao.
She, however, doesn't seem to notice their feelings.  Perhaps she
realises that acknowledging their feelings would force her to choose
one of them and alienate the other.  She tries her best to steer the
middle ground.  So we see the three of them hanging out as Tao
prepares to sing at the New Year festival.  Zhang shows them his new
car, and later takes them for a ride in it.  They burst fireworks on
the frozen Fen river.  

The tense bonhomie between the three is not destined to last.  Already
on their Fen river outing, Zhang tells Tao that he would like to be
alone with her, and that he does not like their triangular tie with
Liangzi.  Tao retorts that the triangle is a stable arrangement, and
is averse to distancing herself from Liangzi.  As the fireworks swish
into the sky over the white river, we see the three friends standing
away from each other, looking up from the vertices of a triangle.

As the mine that employs Liangzi goes bankrupt, Zhang buys it off, and
fires Liangzi.  Tao soon finds herself forced by Zhang to make a
choice.  She visits Liangzi's home with an invitation to her wedding
with Zhang.  Liangzi sees that there is nothing for him in Fenyang,
and leaves the city without bidding Tao goodbye.

Zhang and Tao soon have a child, a boy they name Dollar in honour of
Zhang's capitalist ambitions.  They also adopt a dog, a white Labrador
who is assumed to have a lifespan of 15 years.

\subsection{The middle years}
\label{sec:m1ubz2fo}

It is 2014.  Tao's Labrador, though 15 and old, is still with her.
Zhang and Dollar aren't.  Tao and Zhang got divorced, and the father
won custody of the child.  Tao continues to live in Fenyang, running a
petrol station.  Zhang has moved to Shanghai, where Dollar attends the
International School.

Liangzi has had a difficult life, a migrant labourer moving from one
back-breaking and ill-paying job to another.  He is working in a coal
mine again now, and is married with a small child.  He has acquired a
rasping cough that never seems to leave him.  It is cancer of the
lungs, but he and his devoted wife Xiao Lu (played by Liu Lu) don't
have the money for chemotherapy and other treatment.

Soon Liangzi is unable to work, and the family return to his home in
Fenyang.  Unable to see his suffering, and guessing at her husband's
first love, Lu approaches Tao and asks her to help.  Tao visits them
and hands over the money for the treatment.

Liangzi disappears from the story at this juncture.  It is surprising
to see a central character going away when about half the film is yet
to go.  I assume he got better with the chemotherapy and the
medicines.  Or perhaps he died, loyal lover that he was, broken by the
harrowing and lonely years on the road.

Age is catching up with Tao.  Her dearly beloved father dies while
visiting an old friend in another city.  Tao travels there to bring
his body back to be cremated in Fenyang.  She speaks formally with the
doctor at the mortuary, but breaks into rending tears in front of her
father's friend.  I wonder why he didn't hold her, comfort her.
Alone, she brings her dead father back in an ambulance.

Tao's young son visits Fenyang from Shanghai for his grandfather's
funeral.  He looks just about six, but Tao is impatient with him.  She
calls his habitual scarf girlish, and yells at him in public when he
doesn't know the funeral rituals.  She stops his phone calls to his
stepmother in Shanghai.  One feels sorry for the child, but they
realise their love for each other as she takes the train to Shanghai
with him.  He rests his head on her shoulder, and, later, sleeping on
the berth, plays with the keys to her house that she has presented
him.

\subsection{Old age}
\label{sec:7wgsj9bn}

It is 2025.  Tao is old.  Her Labrador is gone, but he seems to have
left one of his descendants, a white puppy, to look after her.

Zhang has moved his family to Melbourne (although the scenes of this
part were filmed more than 2000 miles away in Bunbury), and his second
wife also seems to have separated from him.  He has grown old, and
spends his time drinking with his Chinese-Australian friends in his
designer-home.  He doesn't know much English, and talks to his son in
Mandarin.

Dollar is now a teenager.  He goes to a posh school, doesn't speak his
mother tongue, and barely understands his father's words.  Their
relationship has turned fractious, the differences between them
exacerbated by the difficulties of Dollar's adolescence in a foreign
environment.  He is so traumatised by Tao's absence that he cannot
bear to utter her name, and says that he is a test-tube baby without a
mother.

At school, Dollar has an easy equation with his friends, several of
them of Chinese origin.  Mia (played by Sylvia Chang) teaches these
children Mandarin and Chinese culture.  The kids are bright, and there
is a playful repartee between them and her in the class.

Dollar works the evenings at a Chinese restaurant, and sometimes
delivers dinner to Mia's apartment.  Over time they become close, and
fall in love with each other.  The relationship between the
middle-aged teacher and the teen is at times disturbing to watch, but
Mia is good to Dollar.  She travels with him, and tells him that he
should go to Fenyang to meet Tao.  He is hesitant because of the long
separation from his mother.

The affair between Dollar and Mia soon succumbs to the difference
between their ages.  As they part from each other in Melbourne, Dollar
at last utters his mothers name, ``Tao''.

Tao is living alone in Fenyang.  We see her mincing meat in her
kitchen as she has always done.  Sometimes she hears voices calling
out her name.  She smiles at her fancies, and takes her Lab out for a
walk on the frozen Fen.

The river is much like what it was that New Year in 1999 when she
described a triangle with Zhang and Liangzi.  The water has turned to
ice again.  Tao removes the leash from her dog.  She raises her head
to the sky, and dances slowly, as she did long ago in the disco, to
the Pet Shop Boys singing \emph{Go West}.  That's how the film ends.

Did Tao decide to dance to her death in the freezing cold? Did she let
her dog go because she wasn't going to return home?  We are not told,
but my answer to both these questions would be a yes.  Did Dollar
overcome the pain of the childhood away from her, and travel to
Fenyang to meet her?  I don't think he did.  Perhaps it doesn't matter
anymore now, as she moves gently in the falling snow.

\bibsection

\end{document}

%%% End of file
